>> Woodruff: HUNDREDS OF
THOUSANDS OF OPPOSITION
PROTESTERS PACKED CAIRO'S TAHRIR
SQUARE FOR THE THIRD DAY IN A
ROW, AGAIN CALLING FOR EGYPTIAN
PRESIDENT MORSI'S OUSTER, AND
MORE HIGH-LEVEL OFFICIALS LEFT
HIS CABINET.
GOOD EVENING.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
ON THE NEWSHOUR TONIGHT, WE GET
THE LATEST ON THE TURMOIL, AS
THE CLOCK TICKS DOWN ON THE
MITARYLI'S DEADLINE FOR
RESOLVING THE STANDOFF.
>> Woodruff: THEN, WITH THE
DEADLY FIRE IN ARIZONA
CONTINUING TO BURN OUT OF
CONTROL, WE EXAMINE WHETHER
HOTTER TEMPERATURES AND DRIER
CONDITIONS ARE FUELING THE
FLAMES NATIONWIDE.
>> Ifill: RAY SUAREZ HAS THE
STORY OF NEWLY RELEASED
DOCUMENTS REVEALING HOW THE
MILWAUKEE ARCHDIOCESE DEALT WITH
DOZENS OF CATHOLIC PRIESTS
ACCUSED OF SEXUALLY ABUSING
CHILDREN.
>> Woodruff: AS PRESIDENT OBAMA
ENDS HIS AFRICA TRIP, WE LOOK AT
THE ADMINISTRATION'S OUTREACH TO
THE CONTINENT TO BOLSTER TRADE
AND INVESTMT ANEND BUILD ON
FORMER PRESIDENT BUSH'S EFFORTS
TO COMBAT AIDS.
>> Ifill: AND JEFFREY BROWN
TALKS WITH THE LEAD GUITARIST OF
THE BAND PHISH, TREY ANASTASIO,
ABOUT THE ART OF THE JAM, AND
LIFE AS A MUSIC MAN.
>> A LOT OF THE PEOPLE THAT COME
SEE US HAVE BEEN COMING FOR 20,
30 YEARS.
AS STRANGE AS IT SOUNDS, I HAVE
RELATIONSHIPS WITH PEOPLE WHO
STAND LIKE TEN ROWS BACK AND
DANCE.
>> Woodruff: THAT'S ALL AHEAD ON
TONIGHT'S NEWSHOUR.
>> Ifill: EGYPT'S POLITICAL
CRISIS DEEPENED TODAY AS THE
MILITARY PRESSED PRESIDENT
MOHAMMED MORSI TO MAKE
CONCESSIONS TO THE OPPOSITION.
MASSIVE CROWDS TOOK TO THE
STREETS AGAIN TODAY KEEPING UP
THE PRESSURE ON THE EMBATTLED
MORSI.
THE MILITARY DEADLINE ENERGIZED
MANY OF THEM.
>> THE ARMY AND THE PEOPLE ARE
UNITED.
THE ARMY IS SUPPORTING THE
PEOPLE NOT ANY REGIME OR ANY
GOVERNMENT.
>> EGYPT'S STATE NEWS SERVICE
REPORTEDDED THAT MILITARY
GENERAL SAID THE ELECTED
PARLIAMENT SHOULD BE DISSOLVED,
E CTHONSTITUTION SUSPENDED AND
AN INTERIM ADMINISTRATION
CREATED IF THE EGYPTIAN
PRESIDENT IS UNABLE TO CREATE A
ROAD MAP TO WRECK SON SILL
IATION WITH OPPONENTS BY
TOMORROW.
HE WAS PICTURED MEETING WITH
MORSI.
EGYPT'S PRIME MINISTER WAS SEED
BETWEEN THEM.
BUT HIS POLITICAL ISOLATION HAS
INCREASED.
IN A STATEMENT RELEASED
OVERNIGHT MORSI'S OFFICE SAID HE
WAS NOT INSULTED BY THE MILITARY
ABOUT ITS ULTIMATUM.
WE WILL NOT ALLOW EGYPT WITH ALL
FORCES TO RETURN BACKWARDS UNDER
ANY CIRCUMSTANCES, THE SPHAIMENT
READ.
WE ALL CHOSE DEMOCRATIC MEANS AS
THE ONLY SAFE WAY TO MANAGE OUR
DIFFERENCES OF OPINION.
PRESIDENT OBAMA ALSO PHONED
MORSI LAST NIGHT.
A WHITE HOUSE STATEMENT RELEASED
AFTERWARD READ IN PART THE
PRESIDENT TOLD PRESIDENT MORSI
THAT THE UNITED STATES IS
COMMITTED TO THE DEMOCRATIC
PROCESS IN EGYPT AND DOES NOT
SUPPORT ANY SINGLE PARTY OR
GROUP.
HE STRESSED THAT DEMOCRACY IS
ABOUT MORE THAN ELECTIONS.
EGYPTIAN ARMY ATTACK HELICOPTERS
CIRCLED TAHRIR SQUARE TODAY.
MANY PROTESTORS WHO SAW IT AS A
SIGN OF LIDASORITY WELCOMED THE
MILITARY'S MOVE.
>> NO, THE ARMY DID NOT CARRY
OUT A COUPs.
THIS IS THE PEOPLE'S WILL.
THE MUSLIM BROTHERHOOD HAS
FAILED.
THEY FAILED TO GOVERNMENT.
>> THE MILITARY STATEMENT
ESTEYRDAY WAS A GREAT STATEMENT
AND MADE ALLHE T EGYPTIAN PEOPLE
HONOR AND SALUTE OUR SUPREME
COUNCIL OF THE ARMED FORCES.
>> OUTSIDE THE AVIATION MINISTRY
ARMORED VEHICLES SHOWED MILITARY
FORCE.
SOLDIERS STOOD BY AS OBSERVERS.
BUT MORSI SUPPORTER VOWED TO
RESIST ANY EFFORTS TO DRIVE THE
EGYPTIAN PRESIDENT FROM OFFICE.
>> THE GENERAL YESTERDAY DID A
GREAT SERVICE TO THE REVOLUTION
BECAUSE HE READIED THE ISLAMIC
FORCES ONCE MORE.
THEY SAY IT IS IN THEY SAY IT
ISN'T A MILITARY COUPS.
IN FACT IT IS A LIBERAL SECULAR
COUPS AGAINST THE EGYPTIAN
REVOLUTION.
>> Ifill: THE OPPOSITION AGREED
TO DESIGNATE MOHAMMED AL BAR DAY
AS ITS DELEGATE TO ANY POLITICAL
NEGOTIATIONS.
MEANWHILE, SENIOR MEMBER OF THE
MUSLIM BROTHERHOOD DENOUNCED THE
MILITARY'S EDICT AS A MISTAKE.
>> IT FAILED TO MENTION THE WORD
"CONSTITUTION" OR "LAW."
I THINK THERE WERE MANY EXTERNAL
AND INTERNAL POWERS BEHIND THE
PLAN FOR THESE DAYS.
MILLIONS WERE SPENT TO BACK A
COUNTERREVOLUTION AGAINST THE
EGYPTIAN REVOLUTION.
THAT TOPPLED HOSNI MUBARAK AND
HIS REGIME.
>> Ifill: WITH TENSIONS AT A
BREAKING POINT THIS AFTERNOON,
THERE WERE REPORTS OF ARMED
CLASHES AND CASUALTIES BETWEEN
MORSI-BACKERS AND OPPONENTS IN
CAIRO.
A SHORT TIME AGO, PRESIDENT
MORSI ANNOUNCED VIA TWITTER THAT
HE WILL BE HOLDING "ONTO
CONSTITUTIONAL LEGITIMACY" AND
CALLED ON THE EGYPTIAN MILITARY
TO WITHDRAW ITS ULTIMATUM.
FOR MORE I'M JOINED BY NANCY
YOUSSEF OF MCCLATCHY NEWSPAPERS
IN CAIRO.
NANCY, THIS IS UNFOLDING EVEN AS
WE SPEAK.
WE ALSO HEARD VIA TWITTER THIS
AFTERNOON THAT PRESIDENT MORSI
SAID HE IS NOT GOING TO GIVE
INTO THIS ULTIMATUM BY THE
MILITARY.
WHAT IS THE HEALTH OF HIS REGIME
TONIGHT?
>> WELL, AS YOU MENTIONED
EARLIER AT LEAST FIVE OF HIS
MINISTERS RESIGNED.
TWO GOVERNMENT SPOKESMEN, A
CABINET SPOKESMAN, AND THE
STREETS ARE AS PACKED AS THEY
WERE YESTERDAY AND THE DAY
BEFORE.
AND IT SHOWS NO SIGNS OF
SUBSIDING.
TOMORROW AT 4:00 P.M. THE ARMY
DEADLINE WILL BE HERE.
AND WE EXPECT THAT
WILL FALL ON THE MILITARY TO
RESOLVE THIS IMPASSE WHICH, FROM
MORSI'S SPEECH SO FAR, HE'S NOT
GIVING UP ANY GROUND TO THE
OPPOSITION.
HE'S BLAMING REMNANTS.
HE'S BLAMING CORRUPTION.
HE'S CALLING HIMSELF THE
LEGITIMATE LEADER.
WHILE HE ASKS FOR MORE TIME HE
HASN'T LAID OUT ANY SPECIFICS
ABOUT HOW HE'S GOING TO ADDRESS
THE NEEDS AND THE DEMANDS OF
LITERALLY HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS
OF PEOPLE CURRENTLY ON THE
STREETS.
>> Ifill: NANCY, WE CAN HEAR
THOSE HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS OF
PEOPLE BEHIND YOU EVEN AS YOU'RE
SPEAKING TO US TONIGHT.
I WONDER WHAT THEY ARE TELLING
YOU WHEN YOU GO TO THE SQUARE
AND YOU OBSERVE THIS CLOSE UP.
WHAT ARE PEOPLE SAYING?
>> WELL, IT'S INTERESTING
BECAUSE THERE ARE CERTAIN THINGS
THAT THEY AGREE ON.
WHICH IS THAT MORSI SHOULD NO
LONGER BE THE PRESIDENT, EVEN
THOUGH HE WAS DEMOCRATICALLY
ELECTEDDED JUST 367 DAYS AGO.
AND HIS MUSLIM BROTHERHOOD, THE
PARTY THROUGH WHICH HE ASCENDED
TO THE PRESIDENCY SHOULD NO
LONGER HAVE THE GRIPNL, ECONOMIN
A SENSE IDENTITY THAT IT DOES
RIGHT NOW.
AND AFTER THAT, THERE'S NO CLEAR
ANSWER FROM THE OPPOSITION.
THERE ARE PEOPLE WHO ARE SAYING
THERE SHOULD BE AN EARLY
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION.
THERE ARE PEOPLE WHO ARE SAYING
THE ARMY SHOULD TAKE OVER FOR A
PERIOD OF SIX MONTHS, ONE YEAR.
I TALKED TO A MAN TODAY WHO SAID
THEY WERE BE IN CHARGE FOR THREE
YEARS.
THERE ARE PEOPLE WHO ARE SAYING
THERE SHOULD BE A REFERENDUM ON
THE CONSTITUTION, THAT A NEW
CONSTITUTIONAL COMMITTEE PUT
TOGETHER.
AND IT'S THAT VARIETY OF
RESPONSES FROM THE OPPOSITION
THAT MAKES FINDING A RESOLUTION
TO THIS VERY DIFFICULT, EVEN IN
THE BEST-CASE SCENARIO.
THERE'S SOME COMPROMISE WHICH IS
REACHED BY TOMORROW, IT DOESN'T
LOOK LIKE THE SORT OF CORE
ISSUES WILL BE RESOLVED.
THERE WILL ALWAYS BE PEOPLE WHO
ARE OPPOSED TO MORSI AND WHO ARE
LOOKING FOR A DIFFERENT KIND OF
REPRESENTATION FROM THE
OPPOSITION THAN THEY GET.
>> Ifill: SURELY THERE IS THE
PRESENCE OF SOME PRO MORSI
FORCES IN TORY OR ELSEWHERE
TODAY.
>> RIGHT, WHAT'S INTERESTING IS
THE PRO AND ANTI-MORSI RALLIES
TRY TO STAY AWAY FROM EACH OTHER
BECAUSE WHEN THEY DO MEET, IT
ENDS VIOLENTLY.
I WAS CAUGHT IN A GUN FIRE TODAY
IN GIZA, A DISTRICT VERY CLOSE
TO HERE, IN WHICH THE PRO MORSI
RALLY HAD STARTED AND RESIDENTS
ALLEGEDLY SHOT AT THE PRO
RALLY.
ITY RUPTED INTO STREET FIGHTS
AND GUN FIGHTS.
IT TURNED VIOLENT VERY QUICKLY.
SO THERE WAS A CONCERTED EFFORT
BY BOTH SIDES TO SORT OF STAY
APART.
THAT SAID, WHEN YOU GO TO THE
BIGGEST ANTI-OR EXCUSE ME PRO
MORSI RALLY WHICH IS IN THE
WESTERN PART OF THE CITY,
THEY'RE MARCHING, THEY'RE
FORMING SORT OF PLATOON-SIZED
MILITARY UNITS WITH I GUESS YOU
COULD CALL THEM COMBAT
EXERCISES.
SOME ARE WEARING LIFE VESTS TO
SERVE AS BULLET-PROOF VESTS FOR
THE RUBBER BULLETS WHILE WEARING
CONSTRUCTION HATS AND MARCHING
IN FORMATION WEARING FLIP FLOPS
AND CARRYING STICKS AND THEY'RE
TRYING TO SHOW THAT THEY'RE
PREPARED TO DEFEND THEIR
PRESIDENT.
SOME SEE IT AS AN ISLAMIC
MISSION.
I HEARD OVER AND OVER AGAIN AT
THE PRO MORSI RALLY THAT THEY
WERE PREPARED TO MARTYR
THEMSELVES IN DEFENSE OF THIS
PRESIDENT.
THAT THE DEFENSE OF THIS
PRESIDENT, THE DEFENSE OF THEIR
FAITH WERE TIED TOGETHER.
>> Ifill: WE KNOW THAT PRESIDENT
OBAMA CALLED PRESIDENT MORSI
LAST NIGHT AND THAT SECRETARY OF
STATE JOHN KERRY HAS BEEN IN
TOUCH WITH LEADERS AS WELL.
IF THE U.S.... IS THE U.S.
PERCEIVED TO BE BETWEEN A ROCK
AND A HARD PLACE ON THIS?
THEY SUPPORTED MORSI'S
DEMOCRATIC ELECTION.
NOW THEY APPARENTLY ARE
SUGGESTING THAT HE SHOULD LISTEN
TO THE PEOPLE IN THE STREETS.
>> WELL, IT DEPENDS ON WHO YOU
ASK.
ANN PATTERSON, U.S. AMBASSADOR
HERE, SAID LAST WEEK THAT SHE
DID NOT THINK THAT PROTEST WAS
THE WAY TO BRING ABOUT A
SOLUTION.
THAT IT WAS TO BE BROUGHT ABOUT
POLITICALLY.
A LOT OF OPPONENTS WERE ANGRY
ABOUT THIS.
WE STARTED TO SEE PEOPLE BURNING
PICTURES OF HER IN THE SQUARE.
BUT I HAVE TO TELL YOU IN THE
LAST COUPLE DAYS, YOU DON'T HEAR
AS MUCH ABOUT THE UNITED STATES.
SOME PEOPLE WILL SAY THAT THE
UNITED STATES IS GOING TO MAKE
SURE THAT MORSI STAYS IN POWER.
THAT'S ONE OF THE SORT OF
CONSPIRACY THEORIES AMONGST THE
OPPONENTS.
BUT THE AMERICAN ROLE HERE IS
REALLY QUITE ANCILLARY.
THIS IS REALLY AN EGYPTIAN-LED
MOVEMENT AND ABOUT FINDING
EGYPTIAN SOLUTIONS.
THERE'S NOT AN EFFORT BY EITHER
SIDE TO TURN TO THE UNITED
STATES AS A BROKER IN THIS
POLITICAL STALEMATE.
>> Ifill: IS THERE ANY CONCERN
AMONG EGYPTIANS THAT WHATEVER
HAPPENS TO MORSI THAT THEY MIGHT
BE TAKING A TURN AWAY FROM THEIR
HARD-WON DEMOCRACY?
>> THERE ARE BECAUSE SINCE HOSNI
MUBARAK HAD SERVED HERE FOR
THREE DECADES RESIGNED, EGYPT
HAS BEEN LED BY A MILITARY
COUNCIL FOR 18 MONTHS AND NOW
MORSI FOR A YEAR.
THIS PERSISTENT CHANGE OF POWER
ISN'T SEEN AS BRINGING ABOUT THE
CORE THINGS THAT PEOPLE SAY THEY
WANT: BETTER SECURITY, BETTER
ECONOMICS, A SITUATION FOR
THEMSELVES PERSONALLY AND
NATIONALLY.
THAT THIS REPEATED TURNOVER
CANNOT BRING ABOUT THOSE VERY
CORE THINGS.
SO WHEN YOU TALK TO PEOPLE,
PARTICULARLY THOSE WHO SUPPORT
MORSI THEY ARGUE THAT.
STATEMENT MORSI IS SUCH A
DIVISIVE FIGURE, HE HAS TREATED
THE PRESIDENCY FROM THE
OPPOSITION'S PERSPECTIVE AS...
THAT HE ONLY HAS ONE MOMENT OF
ACCOUNTABILITY.
THAT WAS ON ELECTION DAY.
AND THOSE WHO OPPOSE HIM CAN
SPEAK UP AGAIN FOUR YEARS FROM
NOW AND NOT BEFORE THAT.
IT'S THAT FRICTION BETWEEN WHAT
CONSTITUTES PUBLIC
ACCOUNTABILITY, WHAT SHOULD BE
PUBLIC... WHAT SHOULD A
PRESIDENT BE PUBLICLY
ACCOUNTABLE FOR?
IT'S THAT DIVISION.
I DON'T THINK EGYPTIANS WANT TO
SEE THISY PETEED TURNOVER, BUT
STATEMENT WHAT WE'RE HEARING ON
THE STREETS IS THEY WANT TO BE
HEARD AND NOT TO BE EXCLUDED IN
THE POLITICAL PROCESS.
>> Ifill: NANCY USE RECEIVE IN
CAIRO FOR US TONIGHT.
THANK YOU SO MUCH,NANC Y.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: STILL TO COME ON
THE NEWSHOUR, CONNECTIONS
BETWEEN RECORD HEAT AND DEADLY
WILDFIRES; DETAILS ABOUT SEXUAL
ABUSE IN THE MILWAUKEE
ARCHDIOCESE; PRESIDENT OBAMA'S
AFRICA INITIATIVES; AND ROCK AND
ROLL STAR TREY ANASTASIO.
BUT FIRST, THE OTHER NEWS OF THE
DAY.
HERE'S HARI SREENIVASAN.
THE OBAMAED ADMINISTRATION
ANNOUNCED IT IS IS DELAYING THE
EMPLOYER PORTION OF THE MANDATE
LAW FOR PUN YEAR.
THE LAW REQUIRES BUSINESSES WITH
MORE THAN 50 EMPLOYEES TO EITHER
PROVIDE HEALTH INSURANCE OR PAY
A PENALTY.
THE ADMINISTRATION SAID IT WAS
RESPONDING TO EMPLOYERS'
CONCERNS ABOUT THE COMPLEXITY OF
THE LAW.
THE NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY
LEAKER, EDWARD SNOWDEN, RAN INTO
A NUMBER OF HURDLES TODAY AS HE
TRIED TO FIND A PLACE TO GO.
FOR MORE THAN A WEEK NOW SNOWDEN
HAS BEEN STUCK INSIDE A TRANSIT
AREA AT THIS MOSCOW AIRPORT.
HE NO LONGER HAS A U.S. PASSPORT
AND AMERICAN OFFICIALS WANT HIM
EXTRADITED FOR RELEASING
CLASSIFIED DOCUMENTS.
ACCORDING TO THE WEBSITE WICKY
LEAKS SNOWDEN HAS APPLIED FOR
ASYLUM IN 20 COUNTRIES.
AND IN A STATEMENT THE
30-YEAR-OLD CRITICIZED U.S.
EFFORTS TO KEEP HIM IN LIMBO.
IT READ IN PART, QUOTE, THE
OBAMA ADMINISTRATION HAS NOW
ADOPTEDDED THE STRATEGY OF USING
CITIZENSHIP AS A WEAPON.
ALTHOUGH I AM CONVICTED OF
NOTHING, IT HAS UNILATERALLY
REVOKED MY PASSPORT LEAVING ME A
STATELESS PERSON.
ONE OF THE NATIONS SNOWDEN
REACHED OUT TO VENEZUELA.
THE PRESIDENT THERE DISCUSSED
SNOWDEN'S CASE TODAY DURING A
TRIP TO MOSCOW TO MEET WITH
RUSSIAN PRESIDENT SLAM MERE
PUTIN.
HE GAVE NO SIGN THAT HE WOULD
ACCEPT SNOW DEP AS ASYLUM
APPLICATION BUT HE APPLAUDED HIS
ACTIONS.
>> THE REVELATIONS OF THIS YOUNG
MAN HAVE GREAT VALUE.
HE MUST BE PROTECTED BY
INTERNATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS.
WHAT CRIME HAS HE COMMITTED?
DID HE KILL ANYONE?
DID HE PLANT A BOMB AND KILL
ANYONE?
>> NO.
MUCH TTERBE.
HE HAS PREVENTD WARS.
>> Reporter: HE ALSO AVOIDED
QUESTIONS SO WHETHER HE WOULD
FLY SNOWDEN BACK WITH HIM TO
VENEZUELA.
SNOWDEN HAD ASKED FOR ASYLUM IN
RUSSIA BUT TODAY HE DROPPED THAT
REQUEST BECAUSE RUSSIA WOULD
ONLY CONSIDER LETTING HIM STAY
IF HE STOPPED THE LEAKS.
IN BREW MY SNOWDEN WAS ALSO A
TOPIC OF CONVERSATION BETWEEN
SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN KERRY
AND RUSSIAN FOREIGN MINISTER
SERGEI LABOROV.
>> WE WILL (MUMBLING).
AS SNOWDEN AWAITS HIS FATE IN
MOSCOW SEVERAL NATIONS WERE
QUICK TO DENY HIS BIG FOR ATIME
UP INCLUDING INDIA AND POLL
LAND.
THERE WAS MORE FALLOUT FROM THE
N.S.A. LEAKS TODAY
N.S.A. LEAKS TODAY WITH AN
THERE WAS MORE FALLOUT FROM THE
APOLOGY FROM THE NATIONAL
N.S.A. LEAKS TODAY WITH AN
DIRECTOR OF INTELLIGENCE TO
APOLOGY FROM THE NATIONAL
CONGRESS.
DIRECTOR OF INTELLIGENCE TO
IN MARCH, JAMES CLAPPER WAS
CONGRESS.
ASKED IF THE N.S.A. GATHERED
IN MARCH, JAMES CLAPPER WAS
DATA ON MILLIONS OF AMERICANS,
ASKED IF THE N.S.A. GATHERED
AND ANSWEREDHAT  TIT DIDN'T
DATA ON MILLIONS OF AMERICANS,
HAPPEN WITTINGLY.
AND ANSWEREDHAT  TIT DIDN'T
HE ACKNOWLEDGED IN A LETTER
HAPPEN WITTINGLY.
TODAY THAT WAS "CLEARLY
HE ACKNOWLEDGED IN A LETTER
ERRONEOUS."
TODAY THAT WAS "CLEARLY
ABOUT 2,500 SYRIANS ARE BELIEVED
ERRONEOUS."
TO BE TRAPPED INSIDE THE
ABOUT 2,500 SYRIANS ARE BELIEVED
EMBATTLED TOWN OF HOMS AS
TO BE TRAPPED INSIDE THE
FIGHTING THERE RAGED FOR ANOTHER
EMBATTLED TOWN OF HOMS AS
DAY.
FIGHTING THERE RAGED FOR ANOTHER
THAT'S ACCORDING TO U.N.
DAY.
SECRETARY GENERAL BAN KI-MOON,
THAT'S ACCORDING TO U.N.
WHO URGED BOTH SIDES TO AVOID
SECRETARY GENERAL BAN KI-MOON,
ANY FURTHER CIVILIAN CASUALTIES.
WHO URGED BOTH SIDES TO AVOID
ELSEWHERE, NEW SHELLING WAS
ANY FURTHER CIVILIAN CASUALTIES.
REPORTED IN A REBEL-CONTROLLED
ELSEWHERE, NEW SHELLING WAS
DISTRICT ON THE OUTSKIRTS OF THE
REPORTED IN A REBEL-CONTROLLED
CAPITAL, DAMASCUS.
DISTRICT ON THE OUTSKIRTS OF THE
THICK PLUMES OF SMOKE COULD BE
CAPITAL, DAMASCUS.
SEEN RISING ABOVE THE AREA.
THICK PLUMES OF SMOKE COULD BE
AT LEAST 11 PEOPLE WERE KILLED.
SEEN RISING ABOVE THE AREA.
BOMBINGS AND CLASHES KILLED MORE
AT LEAST 11 PEOPLE WERE KILLED.
THAN 50 PEOPLE ACROSS IRAQ
BOMBINGS AND CLASHES KILLED MORE
TODAY.
THAN 50 PEOPLE ACROSS IRAQ
SEVEN MILITANTS ALSO DIED.
TODAY.
MOST OF THE ATTACKS TARGETED
SEVEN MILITANTS ALSO DIED.
SHIITE AREAS.
MOST OF THE ATTACKS TARGETED
THERE WAS NO IMMEDIATE CLAIM OF
SHIITE AREAS.
RESPONSIBILITY.
THERE WAS NO IMMEDIATE CLAIM OF
IRAQ HAS SEEN A SPIKE IN
RESPONSIBILITY.
VIOLENCE IN RECENT MONTHS.
IRAQ HAS SEEN A SPIKE IN
AT LEAST 2,000 PEOPLE HAVE DIED
VIOLENCE IN RECENT MONTHS.
SINCE THE START OF APRIL.
AT LEAST 2,000 PEOPLE HAVE DIED
TALIBAN SUICIDE BOMBERS ATTACKED
SINCE THE START OF APRIL.
THE GATES OF NATOA  SUPPLY
TALIBAN SUICIDE BOMBERS ATTACKED
COMPOUND IN THE AFGHAN CAPITAL
THE GATES OF NATOA  SUPPLY
TODAY, KILLING SEVEN PEOPLE.
COMPOUND IN THE AFGHAN CAPITAL
THE FORCE OF THE EXPLOSION
TODAY, KILLING SEVEN PEOPLE.
CARVED A MASSIVE CRATER INTO THE
THE FORCE OF THE EXPLOSION
GROUND AND DAMAGED A NEARBY
CARVED A MASSIVE CRATER INTO THE
GUARD TOWER.
GROUND AND DAMAGED A NEARBY
IT WAS THE LATEST IN A SERIES OF
GUARD TOWER.
INCIDENTS TARGETING KEY SITES
IT WAS THE LATEST IN A SERIES OF
AROUND KABUL, IN SPITE OF THE
INCIDENTS TARGETING KEY SITES
TALIBAN'S MOVE TO TAKE PART IN
AROUND KABUL, IN SPITE OF THE
PEACE TALKS.
TALIBAN'S MOVE TO TAKE PART IN
MORE AND MORE AIRLINE PASSENGERS
PEACE TALKS.
ARE GOING TO THE AIRPORT WITH
MORE AND MORE AIRLINE PASSENGERS
GUNS, MANY OF THEM LOADED.
ARE GOING TO THE AIRPORT WITH
THAT WAS THE FINDING OF AN
GUNS, MANY OF THEM LOADED.
ASSOCIATED PRESS ANALYSIS OF
THAT WAS THE FINDING OF AN
TRANSPORTATION SECURITY
ASSOCIATED PRESS ANALYSIS OF
ADMINISTRATION DATA FROM 2011 TO
TRANSPORTATION SECURITY
THE PRESENT DAY.
ADMINISTRATION DATA FROM 2011 TO
IN THE FIRST SIX MONTHS OF THIS
THE PRESENT DAY.
YEAR, T.S.A. SCREENERS FOUND
IN THE FIRST SIX MONTHS OF THIS
NEARLY 900 GUNS ON PASSENGERS OR
YEAR, T.S.A. SCREENERS FOUND
IN CARRY-ON BAGS.
NEARLY 900 GUNS ON PASSENGERS OR
THAT'S A 30% INCREASE OVER THE
IN CARRY-ON BAGS.
SAME TIME LAST YEAR.
THAT'S A 30% INCREASE OVER THE
CARS AND TRUCKS RACED OFF THE
SAME TIME LAST YEAR.
SALES LOTS IN JUNE AT A PACE NOT
CARS AND TRUCKS RACED OFF THE
SEEN SINCE BEFORE THE RECESSION.
SALES LOTS IN JUNE AT A PACE NOT
FORD LED THE PACK WITH A 14%
SEEN SINCE BEFORE THE RECESSION.
BOOST IN SALES COMPARED TO A
FORD LED THE PACK WITH A 14%
YEAR AGO.
BOOST IN SALES COMPARED TO A
CHRYSLER GAINED 8%, AND GENERAL
YEAR AGO.
MOTORS WAS UP 6.5%.
CHRYSLER GAINED 8%, AND GENERAL
JAPANESE AUTOMAKERS ALSO DID
MOTORS WAS UP 6.5%.
WELL, WITH NISSAN UP 13% AND
JAPANESE AUTOMAKERS ALSO DID
TOYOTA UP 10%.
WELL, WITH NISSAN UP 13% AND
THE SOARING SALES WERE
TOYOTA UP 10%.
ATTRIBUTED TO LOW INTEREST
THE SOARING SALES WERE
RATES, WIDER CREDIT AVAILABILITY
ATTRIBUTED TO LOW INTEREST
AND NEW MODELS.
RATES, WIDER CREDIT AVAILABILITY
HOME PRICES IN THE U.S. JUMPED
AND NEW MODELS.
THE MOST IN 7 YEARS.
HOME PRICES IN THE U.S. JUMPED
IN MAY, THEY WERE UP MORE THAN
THE MOST IN 7 YEARS.
12% OVER A YEAR AGO ACCORDING TO
IN MAY, THEY WERE UP MORE THAN
A REAL ESTATE DATA PROVIDER.
12% OVER A YEAR AGO ACCORDING TO
INITIALLY, THE GOOD ECONOMIC
A REAL ESTATE DATA PROVIDER.
NEWS HAD A POSITIVE IMPACT ON
INITIALLY, THE GOOD ECONOMIC
WALL STREET, BUT THEN STOCKS
NEWS HAD A POSITIVE IMPACT ON
HEADED SOUTH AS TURMOIL IN EGYPT
WALL STREET, BUT THEN STOCKS
GREW.
HEADED SOUTH AS TURMOIL IN EGYPT
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GREW.
LOST 42 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
14,932.
LOST 42 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
THE NASDAQ FELL A POINT TO CLOSE
14,932.
AT 3,433.
THE NASDAQ FELL A POINT TO CLOSE
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE DAY'S
AT 3,433.
MAJOR STORIES.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE DAY'S
NOW, BACK TO JUDY.
MAJOR STORIES.
>> Woodruff: INVESTIGATORS ON
NOW, BACK TO JUDY.
THE GROUND IN ARIZONA ARE STILL
>> Woodruff: INVESTIGATORS ON
TRYING TO DETERMINE WHY SO MANY
THE GROUND IN ARIZONA ARE STILL
FIREFIGHTERS DIED IN SUNDAY'S
TRYING TO DETERMINE WHY SO MANY
TRAGEDY, EVEN AS OTHER CREWS ARE
FIREFIGHTERS DIED IN SUNDAY'S
STRUGGLING TO SLOW THE BLAZE.
THE MORNING BROUGHT CALMER WINDS
IN YARNELL, ARIZONA TODAY.
BUT THE DEADLY FIRE THAT STARTED
FRIDAY REMAINED LARGELY
UNCONTAINED.
FIRE SPOKESWOMAN KAREN TAKIA
WARNED AFTERNOON THUNDERSTORMS
AND WINDS TODAY COULD BRING MORE
THREATS TO THE PARCHED
LANDSCAPE.
>> NOT A LOT OF LARGE TIMBER,
BUT THE VEGETATION OUT THERE,
THAT ME KEET IS EXTREMELY OILY.
WANTS THAT STARTS, AN EMBER GETS
INTO THOSE EXTREMELY DRY FUELS,
THAT FIRE IS GOING TO RIP.
IT'S VERY DIFFICULT TO CONTROL
THAT, AT THAT DEGREE, ESPECIALLY
WITH THE WINDS THAT WE'RE HAVING
OUT HERE.
>> THE DANGEROUS CONDITIONS
WHICH CLAIMED THE LIVES OF 19
PRESCOTT ARIZONA FIREFIGHTERS
SUNDAY.
THEY DIED WHEN THE RAGING FIRE,
FUELED BY SUDDEN AND CHANGING
WIND GUSTS, OVERCAME THE CREW.
LAST NIGHT FELLOW FIREFIGHTERS
PAUSED TO REMEMBER THEIR FALLEN
COMRADES.
>> ANDREW ASCRAFT, 29.
(BELL TOLLING) ANTHONY ROSE, 23)
BELL TOLLING).
>> Woodruff: AND MORE THAN A
THOUSAND PEOPLE GRIEVED THE LOSS
IN A PRESCOTT GYMNASIUM.
(BAG PIPES PLAYING "AMAZING
GRACE)"
THE CITY'S MAYOR PAID TRIBUTE TO
THE CREW.
>> THE CITY OF PRESCOTT, YOU AND
I, WE LOST 18, 19 WONDERFUL
INDIVIDUALS, FAMILY MEN, AND IT
WAS LIKE THAT.
>> Woodruff: ELSEWHERE FAMILY
MEMBERS OF THOSE KILLED SPOKE OF
THEIR LOVED ONES.
KEVIN WAS RECALLED BY HIS SISTER
AS A THIRD-GENERATION
FIREFIGHTER WHO WANTED TO FOLLOW
IN HIS FATHER'S FOOTSTEPS.
>> MY PARENTS LOST A SON.
MY BROTHER LOST HIS BEST FRIEND
AND I LOST MY GUARDIAN ANGELL.
IT'S NEVER GOING TO BE
FORGOTTEN.
>> Woodruff: AND ANDREW ASHCRAFT
WHO LEAVES FOUR CHILDREN, WAS
MOURND BY HIS WIFE.
>> WE CELEBRATE WHO HE IS AND
WILL ALWAYS BE.
HE'S AN ANGELL FOR US NOW.
>> Woodruff: AN INVESTIGATIVE
TEAM IS BEING DEPLOYED TO THE
AREA WHERE THE FIREFIGHTERS
DIED.
THIS FIRE IS PART OF A LARGER
TREND.
>> WE ARE IN A LONG-TERM
DROUGHT.
THAT KEEPS ON BEING REPEATED.
BUT THAT'S WHAT WE'RE SEEING
WITH THESE MEGA FIRES THAT'S
THROUGHOUT THE SOUTHWEST.
NOT ONLY HERE BUT OTHER AREAS.
>> Woodruff: IN ADDITION TO THE
YARNELL HILL BLAZE 15 OTHER
MAJOR WILD FIRES CONTINUE TO
BURN IN THE WESTERN UNITED
STATES.
IN LIGHT OF THE FIRES OUT WEST,
MANY QUESTIONS ARE BEING ASKED
ABOUT WEATHER CONDITIONS, LAND
USE, FORESTRY PRACTICES AND WHAT
ROLE THEY PLAY.
MICHAEL KODAS IS AN AUTHOR AND
JOURNALIST WHO HAS BEEN COVERING
THE WILDFIRE IN PRESCOTT.
HIS BOOK, "MEGAFIRE," IS DUE OUT
NEXT YEAR.
I SPOKE WITH HIM A SHORT TIME
AGO.
MICHAEL KODAS, WELCOME TO THE
NEWSHOUR.
FIRST OF ALL, HOW IS IS THE
CLIMATE IN WHICH THESE WILD
FIRES ARE OCCURRING CHANGING?
>> WELL, WE'VE SEEN A PRETTY
DISTINCT INCREASE IN
TEMPERATURES THROUGHOUT MOST OF
THEWEST  AND PARTICULARLY HERE
IN ARIZONA.
A RECENT REPORT IDENTIFIED
ARIZONA AS HAVING MORE WARMING
THAN ANY OTHER OF THE 50 STATES
IN THE UNITED STATES.
AND WE'VE ALSO SEEN A PRETTY
PREVALENT AND DEEP DROUGHT
THROUGHOUT MOST OF THE WEST THAT
HAS LASTD IN SOME AREAS FOR MANY
YEARS.
THOSE REALLY AFFECT THE FUELS
THAT DRIVE THESE FIRES.
>> SO YOU'RE SAYING THAT THE
COMBINATION OF THE TWO IS HAVING
AN EFFECT.
YOU ALSO TALKED TO US ABOUT
CONDITIONS IN THE COMMUNITY.
THE FACT THAT MORE PEOPLE ARE
BUILDING HOMES INTO AREAS THAT
WERE PREVIOUSLY ALL FORESTS.
>> YEAH.
DEVELOPMENT IS A BIG PART OF
WHAT'S DRIVING OUR FIRE PROBLEM.
WE HAVE, YOU KNOW, THOUSANDS OF
PEOPLE MOVING IN TO FORESTED AND
FLAMMABLE LANDSCAPES.
THAT ADDS FUEL TO THE FOREST.
THE HOUSES, THE PROPANE TANKS
AND THINGS LIKE THAT.
BUT IT ALSO BRINGS A LOT OF
SPARKS INTO THE LAND DISAI
DISAIPSCAPE.
THERE'S ALL KINDS OF STARTS OF
FIRE THAT OCCUR WHEN PEOPLE MOVE
INTO THE FOREST.
YOU KNOW, FROM EVERYTHING FROM
SPARKS FROM VEHICLES ON ROADS TO
ARCING POWER LINES TO SERVE
THOSE COMMUNITIES.
>> Woodruff: AND ONE OF THE
OTHER ELEMENTS YOU TALKED TO US
ABOUT, MICHAEL KODAS, WAS THE
ROLE THAT... THE POCYLI THAT THE
UNITED STATES HAS IN THE WAY IT
TREATS FORESTS.
>> YEAH.
WELL, WE'VE BEEN PUTTING OUT
FIRES IN THE UNITED STATES FOR
MORE THAN A CENTURY.
WE'VE BEEN PUTTING OUT FOREST
FIRES.
THE PROBLEM IS THAT IN MANY
LANDSCAPES, THAT HAS MADE FUTURE
FIRES WORSE.
EVERY TIME YOU PUT OUT A FIRE,
YOU USUALLY END UP LEAVING THAT
FUEL IN THE FOREST.
SO IF YOU HAVE A LANDSCAPE THAT
NORMALLY HAD FIRES COME THROUGH
IT, EVERY, SAY, 30 YEARS, AND
YOU PUT OUT FIRES IN THAT
LANDSCAPE FOR A CENTURY, THEN
YOU HAVE THREE TIMES MORE FUEL
IN THAT FOREST.
THAT FUEL IS AFFECTED BY THE
CLIMATE AND DRIES OUT.
AND THE FIRES THAT RESULT ARE
MUCH HOTTER AND MUCH FASTER BOTH
BECAUSE THE FUELS CAN BE MUCH
DRYER AND AT A MUCH WARMER PLACE
AND BECAUSE THERE'S MUCH MORE
FUEL TO BURN.
>> Woodruff: SO HOW MUCH
LONGER... PEOPLE TALK ABOUT THE
FIRE SEASON.
HOW DOES THE LENGTH OF THE
SEASON TODAY COMPARE TO WHAT IT
WAS?
>> THAT'S BEEN ONE OF THE MORE
DRAMATIC CHANGES PARTICULARLY IN
COLORADO WHERE I LIVE.
BECAUSE WE HAVE SEEN, YOU KNOW,
A WARMER AND DRYER CLIMATE, THE
MOUNTAINS GET LESS SNOW DURING
THE WINTER.
AND THAT SNOW MELTS OFF MUCH
EARLIER IN THE SEASON.
NORMALLY THE SNOW PACK ON HIGH
MOUNTAINS IS KIND OF A RESERVOIR
THAT TRICKLE IRRIGATES FOR US,
YOU KNOW, INTO THE SUMMER.
BUT NOW THE SNOW PACK MELTS OFF
MUCH EARLIER.
THESE FORESTS DRY OUT MUCH
EARLIER.
WE SEE FIRES MUCH EARLIER IN THE
SEASON.
IN COLORADO WE HAD A DEADLY WILD
FIRE IN MARCH OF LAST YEAR.
WE HAD FIREFIGHTERS THAT GOT
BURNED OVER IN THE WINTER OF
LAST YEAR.
AT THE OTHER END OF THE SEASON,
WE ALSO SEE FIRES STARTING MUCH
LATER IN THE SEASON, IN AUTUMN.
WE EVEN HAD A FIRE IN ROCKY
MOUNTAIN NATIONAL PARK THAT
BURNED RIGHT THROUGH THE WINTER.
>> Woodruff: WHEN YOU PUT SOME
OF THESE THINGS TOGETHER, THE
CHANGING CLIMATE, THE WEATHER
CONDITIONS YOU DESCRIBED, THE
FACT THAT PEOPLE ARE BUILDING
INTO FORESTED AREAS, THE POLICY
TOWARD FIRES THEMSELVES, WHAT
DOES IT ALL ADD UP TO IN TERMS
OF WHAT THIS COUNTRY FACES?
>> WELL, WE HAVE BOTH, YOU KNOW,
FAR MORE FLAMMABLE FORESTS IN
MANY OF OUR FORESTED LANDSCAPES
AND PARTICULARLY HERE IN THE
SOUTHWEST WE SEE A DISTINCT
INCREASE IN WILD FIRE DEATHS AND
SCIENTIFICALLY DOCUMENTED FOR
MORE THAN A DECADE NOW.
WE ALSOAVE H A LOT MORE PEOPLE
AT RISK.
THAT REALLY COMPLICATES
FIREFIGHTING POLICY.
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN
TRYING TO PUT FIRE BACK INTO
THESE LANDSCAPES FOR MANY YEARS,
BUT IT'S VERY DIFFICULT WHEN YOU
HAVE COMMUNITIES AND THESE
FORESTS NOW.
THE BURN POLICIES ARE VERY
DIFFICULT TO IMPLEMENT BOTH
BECAUSE THEY CAN BE DANGEROUS TO
COMMUNITIES AND THEY AFFECT AIR
QUALITY.
AND THINNING PROJECTS ARE
INCREDIBLY EXPENSIVE.
PEOPLE HAVE TO CUT OUT EXCESS
FUEL OUT OF THESE FORESTS SO WE
END UP WITH KIND OF A VICIOUS
CIRCLE OF MANY MORE PEOPLE AT
RISK IN THE FOREST AND THE RISKS
IN THOSE FORESTS INCREASING.
>> Woodruff: WE SEE SOME OF THE
PEOPLE THERE BEHIND YOU WHO HAVE
COME TO REMEMBER THE
FIREFIGHTERS WHO DIED ON SUNDAY.
MICHAEL KODAS, WHAT EFFECT DO
YOU THINK THEIR DEATHS MAY HAVE
ON FIREFIGHTING POLICY IF ANY?
>> WELL, I THINK THIS WILL HAVE
AN EFFECT.
IT SEEMS LIKE EVERY DECADE OR
TWO DECADES WE HAVE AN EVENT
WHERE A NUMBER OF FIREFIGHTERS
AND OFTEN VERY GOOD, THE ELITE
FIREFIGHTERS PERISH IN A SINGLE
EVENT.
THE FIRE ON STORM KING MOUNTAIN
IN COLORADO BACK IN 1994 WAS AN
EVENT LIKE THAT.
I THINK IT WILL CAUSE FEDERAL
OFFICIALS TO LOOK OVER
SAFETY POLICIES AND THE WAY THAT
WE GO ABOUT FIGHTING FIRES AND
TRY TO ENSURE THAT THIS KIND OF
TRAGEDY DOESN'T HAPPEN AGAIN.
ONE WORRY IS THAT WITH FIRE
REGIMES CHANGING AND WITH THE
NATURE OF FOREST FIRES CHANGING,
YOU KNOW, ARE OUR SAFETY
POLICIES KEEPING UP WITH THE WAY
THAT THE HAZARD IS DEVELOPING?
>> Woodruff: BASED ON WHAT YOU
SEE IN THE COMMUNITY, HOW ARE
THEY DEALING WITH THIS TODAY?
>> WELL, THIS IS A VERY
TIGHT-KNIT COMMUNITY.
IT'S IMPORTANT TO POINT OUT THAT
WE HAVE A LOT OF HOT SHOT CREWS
IN THE UNITED STATES, BUT THIS
WAS THE ONLY ONE THAT WAS REALLY
PART OF A CITY FIRE DEPARTMENT.
SO IT WASN'T JUST, YOU KNOW, THE
TRADITIONAL HOT SHOTS WHERE YOU
REALLY JUST KNEW THEM FOR THEIR
WORK FIGHTING FIRES UP IN THE
MOUNTAINS.
BUT THESE GUYS WERE REALLY TIED
CLOSELY TO THE COMMUNIT, TO THER
FIREFIGHTERS WHO WORKED ON
PROTECTING HOUSES.
IT WAS ONE REALLY VERY
TIGHT-KNIT COMMUNITY.
SOME OF THESE FIREFIGHTERS COME
FROM FAMILIES WITH A HISTORY THF
KIND OF SERVICE SO I THINK IT'S
BEEN REALLY DEVASTATING TO THE
COMMUNITY.
>> Woodruff: MICHAEL KODAS
JOINING US FROM PRESCOTT,
ARIZONA.
THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: NOW, NEW DOCUMENTS
THAT SHOW A HISTORY OF SEXUAL
ABUSE PROBLEMS IN THE
ARCHDIOCESE OF MILWAUKEE.
RAY SUAREZ HAS THE STORY.
>> Suarez: MANY OF THE CASES GO
BACK DECADES, AND MOST OF THE
6,000 PAGES OF DOCUMENTS WERE5Xf
RELEASED PUBLICLY FOR THE FIRST
TIME YESTERDAY.
THE RECORDS SHOW PEDOPHILE
PRIESTS WERE MOVED FROM PARISH
TO PARISH, OFTEN PROTECTED FROM
CRIMINAL COMPLAINTS.
THE DOCUMENTS ALSO CONTAIN FILES
ON MORE THAN 40 PRIESTS EITHER
DISMISSED OR RESTRICTED,
INCLUDING THE LATE FATHER
LAWRENCE MURPHY, BELIEVED TO
HAVE MOLESTED AS MANY AS TWO
HUNDRED DEAF BOYS.
THE DOCUMENTS ALSO SHINE A LIGHT
ON NEW YORK ARCHBISHOP, CARDINAL
TIMOTHY DOLAN, FORMERLY THE
ARCHBISHOP OF MILWAUKEE.
DOCUMENTS SHOW HE ASKED FOR THE
VATICAN'S APPROVAL IN 2007 TO
MOVE NEARLY $57 MILLION OFF THE
DIOCESAN BOOKS INTO A CEMETERY
FUND TO PROTECT CHURCH ASSETS.
DOLAN DENIES THE CLAIMS AS LONG
"DISCREDITED."
LAURIE GOODSTEIN COVERS THESE
ISSUES FOR THE "NEW YORK TIMES,"
AND JOINS ME NOW.;.LT/+
THE CURRENT MILWAUKEE ARCHBISHOP
WARNED HIS PEOPLE: PREPARE TO BE
SHOCKED.
LORI, IN THESE LATEST DOCUMENTS
WERE THE DETAILS SHOCKING AND
WHAT DO THEY DO TO FILL IN THE
STORY OF CLERICAL ABUSE IN
MILWAUKEE?
>> WELL, YOU CAN TRACE CASES BY
READING THESE DOCUMENTS, A LONG
EVOLUTION SOMETIMES.
THE FIRST REPORTS OF PARENTS
COMING IN TO THE CHANCERY
OFFICES AND REPORTING THAT
SOMETHING HAS HAPPENED TO THEIR
CHILD.
AND THE GROWING AWARENESS AS AN
INCREASING NUMBER OF REPORTS
COME IN AND CHURCH OFFICIALS
BEGIN TO TRY TO GRAPPLE WITH
WHAT TO DO WITH THIS PRIEST.
SOMETIMES IT'S A VERY LONG
EVOLUTION.
IN SOME CASES MORE THAN TWO,
THREE, EVEN FOUR DECADES IN ONE
CASE WHERE THE PRIEST IS OFTEN
SENT FOR TREATMENT, AND THEN HE
IS REASSIGNED.
SOMETIMES REASSIGNED MULTIPLE
TIMES TO MANY PARISHES.
AND THOUGH PARISHES IN MOST
CASES AT LEAST IN EARLIER
DECADES WERE NOT INFORMED THAT
THEIR PRIEST HAD A PROBLEM WITH
PEDESTRIAN OPHELIA.
IN LATER DECADES YOU SEE AN
ATTEMPT BY CHURCH AUTHORITIES TO
DEAL WITH THE LIABILITY, THE
FINANCIAL LIABILITY AND AN
ATTEMPT TO SAY NOW IT'S TIME TO
GET THIS ABUSER OUT OF THE
PRIESTHOOD.
AND IN THAT STEP YOU SEE
CORRESPONDENT BETWEEN THE
ARCHBISHOPS OF MILWAUKEE AND THE
VATICAN WHERE THEY'RE SEEKING
PERMISSION.
SOMETIMES IT TAKES AS MANY AS
SIX YEARS BEFORE THESE CASES ARE
APPROVED BY THE VATICAN TO
REMOVE A PRIEST FROM THE
PRIESTHOOD.
>> Suarez: AND THAT'S WHERE THE
CURRENT CARDINAL ARCHBISHOP OF
NEW YORK, TIMOTHY DOLAN, COMES
INTO THE PICTURE.
WHEN HE WAS SERVING THE CHURCH
IN MILWAUKEE, HE GAVE ONE
VERSION OF EVENTS.
DO THESE DOCUMENTS GIVE ANOTHER?
>> WELL, CARDINAL DOLAN HAS
ALWAYS SAID THAT HE WAS
ATTENTIVE TO VICTIMS AND HE
TRIED TO MOVE PRIESTS OUT OF THE
PRIESTHOOD.
THE DOCUMENTS DO SHOW THAT HE
INDEED DID THAT.
HE WAS WORKING ON THOSE CASES
BEHIND THE SCENES, BUT THERE'S
ONE PARTICULAR POINT THAT
CARDINAL DOLAN HAD ALWAYS
RESISTED.
HE ALWAYS SAID HE DID NOT MOVE
ASSETS OF THE ARCHDIOCESE IN
ORDER TO SHE'LL THEM FROM
LAWSUITS AND LEGAL LIABILITY.
BUT THERE IS ONE PARTICULAR
LETTER THAT APPEARS, AS YOU
MENTIONED, IN 2007 WHERE
CARDINAL DOLAN IS SEEKING
PERMISSION FROM THE VATICAN TO
CREATE A CEMETERY TRUST TO MOVE
THE $57 MILLION OFF THE BOOKS OF
THE ARCHDIOCESE INTO A SEPARATE
TRUST.
IN THAT LETTER, HE SAYS TO THE
VATICAN IN ESSENCE HE SAYS I
THINK THIS IS A GOOD IDEA
BECAUSE IT WILL PROTECT THE
FUNDS FROM LEGAL LIABILITY.
SO THAT IS THE SITUATION WHERE
CARDINAL DOLAN HAS SAID ONE
THING AND HERE YOU HAVE A
DOCUMENT SHOWING SOMETHING ELSE.
>> Suarez: YOU'VE BEEN COVERING
THE LAWSUIT, THE COVER-UPS, THE
ATTEMPTS OF THE CHURCH NOT ONLY
IN THE QULIDZ BUT WORLDWIDE TO
HANDLE THIS BURGEONING SCANDAL.
ARE WE CLOSER TO THE END THAN
THE BEGINNING?
ARE DOCUMENT RELEASES LIKE THESE
PART OF WHAT MAY ALLOW THE
CHURCH TO EVENTUALLY CLOSE DOWN
THIS ERA IN ITS PROBLEMS?
>> SEX ABUSE VICTIMS ARE ASKING
TO SEE THESE DOCUMENTS.
MANY TIMES THEY DON'T KNOW UNTIL
THEY SEE THESE DOCUMENTS THAT
THEY WERE NOT THE ONLY PERSON
REPORTING A PARTICULAR PRIEST.
THEY DON'T KNOW HOW THE CHURCH
HANDLED THINGS.
WHAT WE WERE SAYING BEHIND THE
SCENES ABOUT THEIR CASES.
SO SEEING THESE DOCUMENTS IS
VERY MUCH A VINDICATION FOR A
LOT OF THESE ABUSE VICTIMS.
IN WHAT IT DOES ALSO IS TO
MANY WAYS.
AND PERPETUATE IT BEING IN THE
PUBLIC EYE.
I THINK THAT THE CHURCH WOULD
VERY MUCH LIKE TO MOVE BEYOND
THAT.
>> Suarez: THE MILWAUKEE
DISCLOSURES COME DURING THE SAME
WEEK AS POPE JOHN PAUL II
CLEARED ONE OF THE FINAL HURDLES
TOWARD BEING DECLARED A SAINT IN
A ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH.
A PROCESS THAT IN RELATIVE TERMS
HE ZOOMED THROUGH.
RIGHT NOW THE CHURCH IS DEALING
WITH SOME OF THE LEGACIES OF HIS
PONTIFICATE IN FINANCIAL
SCANDALS, IN THE ONGOING TRIALS
CONCERNING CLERGY ABUSE.
DOES THIS SULLY HIS LEGACY IN A
WAY THAT MAY GIVE HIM PROBLEMS
BEFORE A CAN NON-IZATION PERHAPS
EVEN AS EARLY AS LATER THIS
YEAR?
>> WELL, IT SOUNDS LIKE THE CASE
FOR CAN NON-IZATION IS MOVING
AHEAD BECAUSE WHAT'S NEEDED ARE
VERIFICATION OF MIRACLES AND
HEALINGS.
VATICAN COMMITTEE CHARGED WITH
THAT IS FINDING THOSE.
THERE ARE VICTIMS WHO WOULD, YOU
KNOW, PREFER TO SEE THAT POPE
JOHN PAUL IS NOT MADE A SAINT.
BUT THERE HAVE BEEN SAINTS MADE
IN THE PAST WHO AREN'T PERFECT.
AND THOSE WHO ARE CARRYING
FORWARD THE CASE OF POPE JOHN
PAUL SAY THAT MAY BE THE CASE
HERE.
HE'LL BE HONORED AND RECOGNIZED
FOR MANY OF THE GOOD THINGS HE
DID.
WE JUST WON'T TALK ABOUT THE
REST.
>> Suarez: LORI GOODSTEIN OF THE
"NEW YORK TIMES," THANKS FOR
JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU FOR HAVING ME.
>> Ifill: NEXT, PRESIDENT OBAMA
CAPPED HIS WEEKLONG TOUR OF
AFRICA TODAY, WITH A POIGNANT
REMEMBRANCE IN TANZANIA'S
CAPITAL, DAR ES SALAAM.
TWO U.S. PRESIDENTS, ONE
CURRENT, ONE FORMER, PAID
TRIBUTE TO THE VICTIMS OF AL
QAEDA'S 1998 BOMBING OF THE U.S.
EMBASSIES IN TANZANIA AND
NEIGHBORING KENYA.
THE FORMER PRESIDENT WHO WAS ON
THE CONTINENT TO VISIT WORK DONE
BY HIS FOUNDATION WAS JOINED BY
HIS WIFE LAURA.
SHE WAS HOSTING A SUMMIT ON THE
ROLE OF AFRICA'S FIRST LADIES
CAN PLAY IN THEIR COUNTRY.
FIRST LADY MICHELLE OBAMA JOINED
HER THERE.
>> WE GET TO WORK ON WHAT WE'RE
PASSIONATE ABOUT.
AND I THINK THAT THAT'S
SOMETHING THAT I WOULD ENCOURAGE
LADIES TO NEVER LOSE
SIGHT OF.
>> Ifill: YESTERDAY TO GREAT
FANFARE THE OBAMAS ARRIVED IN
TANZANIA ON THE THIRD AND FINAL
LEG OF THEIR TRIP ACROSS THE
CONTINENT.
THEY HAD ARRIVED FROM SOUTH
AFRICA WHERE ON SUNDAY THEIR
DAUGHTERS JOINED THEM TO TOUR
ROBBIN ISLAND.
THE NOW AILING NELSON MANDELA
SPENT 18 YEARS THERE BEHIND BARS
DURING HIS STRUGGLE AGAINST
APARTHEID.
THE TANS KNEE I CAN'T VISIT
PROVIDED A BRIDGE BETWEEN
CONTRIBUTIONS MADE BY PREVIOUS
U.S. LEADERS AND THE PLEDGES
MR. OBAMA MADE ON THIS VISIT.
THE PRESIDENT'S EMERGENCY PLAN
FOR AIDS REWAS FOUNDED BY
MR. BUSH IN 2003 WITH $15
BILLION COMMITTED TO H.I.V./AIDS
TREATMENT.
THAT EFFORT WAS RENEWED AND
EXPANDED IN 2008 TO THE TUNE OF
$48 BILLION.
YESTERDAY PRESIDENT OBAMA
PRAISED HIS PREDECESSOR'S WORK.
>> THIS IS ONE OF HIS CROWNING
ACHIEVEMENTS.
BECAUSE OF THE COMMITMENT OF THE
BUSH ADMINISTRATION AND THE
AMERICAN PEOPLE, MILLIONS OF
PEOPLE'S LIVES HAVE BEEN SAVED.
>> Ifill: BUT HE PUSHED BACK
AGAINST CRITICS WHO SAY HIS
OWNED ADMINISTRATION ISN'T DOING
ENOUGH.
>> THE FACT OF THE MATTER IS
THAT WE ARE SERVING FOUR TIMES
THE NUMBER OF PEOPLE TODAY THAN
WE WERE WHEN PEPFAR FIRST BEGAN.
BUT BECAUSE WE'VE GOTTEN BETTER
AT IT AND MORE EFFICIENT AT IT,
WE'RE DOING IT AT REDUCED COSTS.
THEN WE'RE NOT TAKING THAT MONEY
OUT OF GLOBAL HEALTH.
WHAT WE'RE DOING IS WE'RE
PUTTING IT BACK INTO THINGS LIKE
TUBERCULOSIS AND MALARIA
ALLEVIATION.
>> Ifill: WHILE PRAISING THOSE
ACHIEVEMENTS, THE TANZANIA
PRESIDENT ASK THAT AMERICANS
GIVE EVEN MORE.
>> WE ASK THAT THEY REALLY GIVE
BECAUSE IT HELPS CHANGE THE
LIVES OF OUR PEOPLE.
BUT IF THEY CAN DO MORE, PLEASE.
>> Ifill: ON THE STREETS OF DAR
ES SALAAM, SOME ECHOED PRESIDENT
OBAMA'S CALL FOR MORE
PARTNERSHIPS AND LESS OUTRIGHT
AID.
>> AS TANS KNEIANS WE SHOULD NOT
JUST WAIT FOR AID FROM DEVELOPED
COUNTRIES.
WE HAVE RESOURCES.
WE HAVE A LOT OF NATURAL
RESOURCES.
I LIKE WHAT PRESIDENT OBAMA
SAID: THAT THEY ARE COMING HERE
TO INVEST BUT WE HAVE TO MEET
HALFWAY.
>> Ifill: DRIVING THAT POINT
HOME, THE PRESIDENT VISITED A
POWER PLANT BUILT WITH A U.S.
GRANT, PART OF A NEWLY ANNOUNCED
$7 BILLION INITIATIVE TO DOUBLE
ACCESS TO ELECTRICITY IN AFRICA.
THERE WERE SOME LIGHTER MOMENTS
AS WELL.
TODAY WITH THE PRESIDENT HE ALSO
KICKED AROUND THIS NEW INVENTION
CALLED A SOCKET BALL.
IT CREATES AND STORES ENERGY AS
IT'S USED WHICH CAN THEN POWER A
LIGHT OR CHARGE A CELL PHONE.
SHORTLY AFTERWARD AND ONCE AGAIN
WITH GREAT CEREMONY, THE
PRESIDENT AND FIRST LADY LEFT
FOR WASHINGTON.
FOR MORE ON HOW THE PRESIDENT
WAS RECEIVED IN AFRICA AND HOW
SUCCESSFUL THE VISIT WAS, WE
TURN TO MWANGI KIMENYI, DIRECTOR
OF THE AFRICA GROWTH INITIATIVE
AT THE BROOKINGS INSTITUTION.
EMIRA WOODS, DIRCTOR OF FOREIGN
POLICY IN FOCUS AT THE INSTITUTE
FOR POLICY STUDIES.
AND CHRIS FOMUNYOH, REGIONAL
DIRECTOR FOR CENTRAL AND WEST
AFRICA AT THE NATIONAL
DEMOCRATIC INSTITUTE.
EMIRA WOODS, STARTI WITNGH YOU,
WHAT IS YOUR SENSE OF WHETHER
THE PRESIDENT ACCOMPLISHED WHAT
HE SET OUT TO DO ON THIS TRIP?
>> I THINK CLEARLY THIS TRIP WAS
MET WITH MIXED REVIEWS.
THERE WERE MANY WHO WERE
EXUBERANT FROM PRESIDENT OBAMA
FIRST RAN FOR OFFICE AND WON
OFFICE AND EVEN WINNING A SECOND
TERM.
WE SAW DURING THIS TRIP THAT THE
EXUBERANCE HAS REALLY WANEDDED
IN A NUMBER OF WAYS.
THERE IS A BIT OF DISCONTENT.
THERE'S A CONTINUATION OF SOME
OF THE POLICIES FROM THE BUSH
ADMINISTRATION TO THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION THAT MAY NOT HAVE
SERVED THE INTEREST OF AFRICA
NOR QUITE FRANKLY THE INTEREST
OF THE U.S.
SO I THINK THERE'S EXCITEMENT
ABOUT THE RHETORIC AND REAL
EXUBERANCE THAT OBAMA DID MAKE A
VISIT NOT JUST TO ONE COUNTRY OR
TWO COUNTRIES BUT REALLY TO
THREE COUNTRIES IN DIFFERENT
PARTS OF THE CONTINENT.
BUT ESSENTIALLY THE POLICIES OF
THE OBAMAED ADMINISTRATION, WHAT
MANY HAD HOPED WOULD BE RESET IN
THE SECOND TERM, STILL HAVE A
LONG WAYS TO GO TO MEET THE
NEEDS AND INTERESTS OF THE
MAJORITY OF PEOPLE ON THE
AFRICAN CONTINENT.
>> I TAKE A DIFFERENT VIEW
BECAUSE I THINK THAT THIS TRIP
HAS BEEN VERY SUCCESSFUL BOTH ON
THE SUBSTANCE AS WELL AS ON THE
SYMBOLISM.
IN TERM OF THE SUBSTANCE I THINK
PRESIDENT OBAMA REALLY SPOKE TO
THE THINGS THAT AFRICANS CARE
ABOUT TODAY.
ISSUES OF GOOD GOVERNANCE, THE
FIGHT AGAINST CORRUPTION.
THE NEED FOR MORE ACCOUNTABILITY
AND TRANSPARENCY.
WE TALK ABOUT THE RULE OF LAW.
HE MET WITH ORGANIZATIONS AND
TALKD ABOUT CITIZEN ENGAGE MANY.
HE ALSO TALKED TO AFRICA'S
FUTURE.
A LOT OF EMPHASIS ON THE YOUNGER
GENERATION.
THIS IS A CONTINENT ON WHICH 60%
OF THE POPULATION IS 25 YEARS OR
YOUNGER.
HE ALSO TALKED ABOUT HIS YOUTH
INITIATIVE, THE INITIATIVE FOR
YOUNG AFRICAN LEADERS IN THE
POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC ARENAS.
HE SUPPOSE TO THE AFRICA OF
TODAY AS WELL AS TO AFRICA OF
THE FUTURE.
AND THE SYMBOLISM WAS REALLY
STRONG BECAUSE OF THE ATTENTION
THAT HE PAID TO THE ISLAND IN
SENEGAL, ROBBIN ISLAND IN SOUTH
AFRICA.
TODAY WITH FORMER PRESIDENT BUSH
HE RAISED THE MONUMENT IN
TANZANIA WITH THE PEOPLE WHO
LOST THEIR LIVES OUT OF THE 1998
BOMBING.
>> Ifill: BUT HE EVEN LEFT ON
THIS TRIP YOU WROTE AN ARTICLE
AND THE HEADLINE WAS GUILT TRIP.
PREVIEWING THIS.
DO YOU THINK IN RETROSPECT THAT
NOW THAT THE TRIP IS OVER THAT
THAT'S WHAT THIS WAS?
>> FOR A PRESIDENT WHO HAS BEEN
REALLY ABSENT IN AFRICA, THIS
WAS A GOOD THING.
IT WAS A GOOD SIGNAL.
BUT YOU REALLY HAVE TO...
>> Ifill: WHEN YOU SAY ABSENT
YOU DON'T COUNT THE 2009 TRIP TO
BEGAN A.
>> IF YOU LOOK AT THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION AND SAY WHEN WE
TALK ABOUT U.S. SL AFRICA
POLICY WHAT ARE WE REALLY
TALKING ABOUT?
DO YOU TAKE IT BACK TO GEORGE
BUSH?
IN THAT SENSE I MEAN OBAMA HAS
NOT BEEN IN AFRICA.
IN THAT SENSE I THINK GOING TO
AFRICA HAS BEEN IMPORTANT.
NOW WE NEED TO DISTINGUISH
BETWEEN MAKING PROCEED
NOWNLSMENTS AND ACTUAL SUBSTANCE
OF WHAT'S GOING TO HAPPEN.
NOW WE CAN'T TELL.
WE HAVE TO WAIT AND SEE.
I THINK IT WILL BE A VERY
IMPORTANT TRIP BECAUSE HE WENT
TO AFRICA AND VISITED THREE
COUNTRIES.
THAT'S BETTER THAN ONE COUNTRY.
SUB SAHARAN AFRICAN COUNTRY.
IN A WAY I WOULD SAY THAT IT'S
BEEN GOOD BUT IT'S STILL NOT
WHAT AFRICA EXPECTED.
>> Ifill: I WANT TO TALK ABOUT
EXPECTATIONS BECAUSE I WONDER IF
THE EXPECTATIONS ARE DIFFERENT
BECAUSE WE HAVE A PRESIDENT OF
AFRICAN DESCENT.
>> WITHOUT A DOUBT, GWEN.
THERE WAS SUCH EXCITEMENT.
A SON OF AFRICA, HIS FATHER FROM
KENYA REACHING THE HIGHEST
OFFICE ON THE PLANET, THE WHITE
HOUSE.
SUCH ENTHUSIASM THROUGHOUT THE
CONTINENT REALLY FOR OBAMA.
AND REALLY THOUGHT THE AFRICAN
WORLD.
BUT I THINK THAT ENTHUSIASM HAS
WANED.
WHEN YOU SEE A CONTINUATION OF A
REAL FOCUS ALMOST NARROWLY SOME
SAY ON THE SO-CALLED WAR ON
TERROR.
WHAT YOU SEE IS STILL A MILL
TARRIZATION OF U.S. ENGAGEMENT
WITH AFRICA.
IT IS NOT ONLY THE CONTINUATION
OF THE AFRICA COMMAND STARTED
UNDER GEORGE BUSH, CONTINUED
UNDER PRESIDENT OBAMA, BUT WE
SEE QUITE FRANKLY, YOU KNOW, THE
NEW ANNOUNCEMENT OF A DRONE BASE
IN NIGER.
YOU SEE STEADY FLOW OF WEAPONS
INTO THE REGION.
THE RESISTANCE OF THE
ADMINISTRATION TO BE A SIGNATORY
ON A U.N. ARMS TRADE TREATY,
RECOGNIZING THAT ARMS COMING
INTO THE CONTINENT ARE WHAT'S
FUELING MUCH OF THE CONFLICT.
SO YOU SEE REALLY A CONTINUATION
OF POLICIES THAT HAVE DONE MUCH
MORE HARM THAN GOOD.
>> Ifill: DOES IT MAKE A
DIFFERENCE WHERE HE CHOSE TO GO?
IN GOING TO SENEGAL AND GOING TO
SOUTH AFRICA AND GOING TO
TANZANIA.
NOT GOING TO NIGERIA OR EET COPE
I CAN'T OR ANYMORE TROUBLED
DEMOCRACIES.
IS THAT SIGNIFICANT?
>> IT'S VERY SIGNIFICANT BECAUSE
I THINK MANY AFRICANS SEE THIS
AS AN EXTENSION OF THE TRIP THAT
HE MADE TO GAN A AND THE
PRONOUNCEMENT THAT WAS MADE IN
THAT SPEECH IN GAN A WHICH IN
MANY WAYS HAVE BEEN REFLECTED IN
HIS POLICY WHERE HE GOT
DEMOCRATIZATION ON GOOD
GOVERNANCE, TRADE AND INVESTMENT
AND HELPING BUILD THE CAPACITY
OF AFRICAN-SECURITY SERVICES TO
BETTER PROTECT PEOPLE ACROSS THE
CON NENT.
THE CHOICE REALLY COINCIDES WITH
THE RHETORIC THAT THIS
ADMINISTRATION HAS HAD.
I THINK IF HE HAD TRAVELED TO
SOME OF THE OTHER COUNTRIES, IT
WOULD HAVE BEEN VERY DIFFICULT
TO MATCH THAT WITH THE POLICY
THAT HE'S PUT FORWARD.
>> Ifill: WHAT IS IT THAT THE
U.S. SHOULD BE DOING HERE?
FROM AID TO TRADE.
IS THAT SOMETHING WE HEARD HIM
TALKING ABOUT?
>> HE HAS TALKED A LOT ABOUT
THAT.
THAT'S WHAT THE POSITION WE'LL
BE TALKING ABOUT.
WHAT WE NEED IS MORE COMMERCIAL
ENGAGE.
HE HAS TRIED TO DO THAT BUT WHAT
WE DON'T KNOW, WE AREN'T SURE.
THE SUBSTANCE OF IT AND HOW
MUCH...
>> Ifill: WHAT WOULD YOU LIKE TO
SEE?
>> WELL, I THINK THAT WE'VE BEEN
TALKING ABOUT SINCE HE CAME TO
OFFICE WAS THAT HE WAS TO BE A
LEADER THAT WOULD GO WITH
AFRICA.
THEY'VE BEEN LOOKING AT AFRICA
AT THE HOPELESS CONTINENT, YOU
KNOW, THE OLD AFRICA, OR AID
AFRICA.
ALL THE COUNTRIES THAT ARE
LOOKING AT IT ARE LOOKING WITH
US WITH A HOPEFUL CONTENT.
LET'S DO BUSINESS.
HE SEEMS TO HAVE DRIFTED.
HE'S TALKING THAT WAY BUT
WHETHER HE DOES SOMETHING WE
HAVE TO WAIT AND SEE.
>> Ifill: HE'S TALKING ABOUT A
$7 BILLION IN ELECTRICITY IN SUB
SAHARAN AFRICA.
IS THAT NOT THE GOOD NEWS YOU'RE
TALKING ABOUT.
>> IT COULD BE.
I THINK WE HAVE TO LOOK
CAREFULLY TO SEE WHAT THAT
ACTUALLY MEANS.
IF I MEANS A CONTINUATION OF
COAL-FIRED PLANTS THERE COULD BE
A PROBLEM BECAUSE IT COULD BE
CONTRIBUTING FURTHER TO GLOBAL
WARMING.
AS THE PRESIDENT SO BEAUTIFULLY
STATED IN HIS SPEECH AT
GEORGETOWN BEFORE HE WENT TO
AFRICA THAT THE U.S. HAS TO DO
MORE BOTH WITHIN ITS BORDERS AND
INTERNATIONALLY TO CURB THIS
CRISIS OF THE CLIMATE THAT THE
PLANET IS FACING.
SO I THINK THE CONCERN IS WITH
COAL-FIRED PLANTS.
THE CONCERN IS ALSO WITH
HYDROELECTRIC POWER.
WE SEE, YOU KNOW, ONE KEY ALLY
OF THE U.S., ETHIOPIA, THEY HAVE
TREMENDOUS AMOUNT OF ASSISTANCE
FROM THE U.S. MOVING STEADILY
TOWARDS HYDROELECTRIC POWER
COULD CREATE MAJOR PROBLEMS
ESSENTIALLY DAMNING THE NILE.
IT COULD CREATE PROBLEMS BETWEEN
EGYPT AND EET YOAP I CAN'T.
YOU KNOW, DISPLACING
COMMUNITIES.
SO THE CONCERN IS THAT THE POWER
IS NEEDED BUT IN WAYS THAT ARE
RENEWABLE.
IN WAYS THAT PROTECT THE PLANET
FOR NOW AND FOR FUTURE
GENERATIONS.
>> Ifill: THE PRESIDENT SAID IN
ONE OF HIS SPEECHES THAT AMERICA
HAS TO UP ITS GAME WHEN IT COMES
TO AFRICA.
DO YOU SEE THE UNITED STATES
DOING THAT?
>> I THINK WHEN WE TAKE... IF WE
TAKE THE ELECTRICITY, THE POWER
AFRICA INITIATIVE WHICH IS JUST
LAUNCHED IT SETS THE GROUND
RULES THAT THERE WILL BE U.S.
INVESTORS IN THE POWER SECTOR IN
AFRICA, BUT IT WILL ALSO FOSTER
INTO AFRICAN TRADE.
I THINK THAT THE INVOLVEMENT OF
THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
WHICH IS GOING TO BE PART OF
THIS INITIATIVE WOULD REALLY BE
VERY HELPFUL IN THAT REGARD.
>> Ifill: IS CHINA BEATING US TO
THE PUNCH ON THAT?
>> AGAIN, WE NEED TO LOOK AT
THIS IF RELATIVE TERMS.
WHEN YOU TALK ABOUT YOU DREAM A
LOT, WHAT ARE WE TALKING ABOUT?
THINK ABOUT WHAT IS DEFINED.
WE DREAM A LOT.
SO I THINK WE NEED TO KNOW WHAT
EXACTLY IS NEW.
WE KNOW A LOT OF THIS INVESTMENT
IS COMMITTED.
I MEAN, THERE MAY BE A GAME HERE
ALSO.
ONCE WE INTERROGATE THEM WE WILL
KNOW WHETHER THEY WANT TO
CHANGE.
>> Ifill: EMIRA WOODS, THANK
YOU, AND THANK YOU BOTH ALL
THREE.
>> A PLEASURE.
THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: FINALLY TONIGHT,
HOW A FRONT MAN OF ROCK IS
CHARMING NEW FANS IN THE WORLD
OF CLASSIC MUSIC, AND YET STILL
JAMMING FOR HIS ADORING BASE
AFTER THREE DECADES ON THE ROAD.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS OUR PROFILE.
>> Brown: IT'S NOT WHERE YOU
EXPECT TO SEE THE LEAD GUITARIST
OF WHAT'S WIDELY SEEN AS ROCK N
ROLL'S LEADING JAM BAND.
BUT THERE WAS TREY ANASTASIO
RECENTLY, BEST KNOWN FOR HIS
WORK WITH THE BAND PHISH,
PERFORMING ARRANGEMENTS OF HIS
MUSIC WITH THE NATIONAL SYMPHONY
ORCHESTRA IN WASHINGTON.
AND EVEN FOR A MAN USED TO
PLAYING FOR THOUSANDS IN HUGE
ARENAS, THIS WAS EXCITING.
>> WHEN YOU STAND IN THAT SPOT
NEXT TO THE PODIUM AND THE
ORCHESTRA IS PLAYING, THE SOUND
IS...
>> Brown: IT'S PRETTY AMAZING,
ISN'T IT?
>> OH, MY GOD, IT'S IN 3-D, AND
IT'S COMING IN EVERY DIRECTION.
MY KNEES GET WEAK.
>> Brown: IT TURNS OUT THAT
ANASTASIO'S LOVE FOR CLASSICAL
MUSIC IS LONG-STANDING, GOING
BACK TO HIS YOUTH.
HE CREDITS A COLLEGE COMPOSITION
TEACHER FOR SHOWING HIM HOW TO
WRITE LARGE-SCALE PIECES MODELED
ON SYMPHONIES, BIG BAND
ARRANGEMENTS, AND MORE.
>> WE USED TO TALK A LOT ABOUT
NOT GETTING SO HUNG UP ON
STYLES, BUT BEING MUCH MORE
FOCUSED ON CONTENT, SO THAT YOU
COULD SNEAK HARMONIC ELEGANCE
INTO ROCK AND ROLL.
>> Brown: YOU FELT THAT FROM THE
BEGINNING?
>> FROM THE BEGINNING,
ABSOLUTELY.
>> Brown: IN 1983, ANASTASIO
FORMED THE BAND THAT WOULD
BECOME PHISH WITH THREE OTHER
MUSICIANS IN BURLINGTON,
VERMONT.
AND OVER 30 YEARS, WITH A BRIEF
BREAKUP IN 2004, THE BAND HAS
DEVELOPED ONE OF THE LARGEST AND
MOST LOYAL FAN BASES IN ROCK 'N'
ROLL, MAKING THEIR NAME NOT ON
NUMBER ONE HITS, BUT FOR THEIR
LIVE PERFORMANCES FEATURING
EXTENDED IMPROVISATIONS, THE
"JAM."
"ROLLING" STONE MAGAZINE DUBBED
PHISTHE H "MOST IMPORTANT BAND
OF THE 1990s," AND ANASTASIO
HIMSELF ONE OF THE 100 GREATEST
GUITARISTS IN ROCK HISTORY.
AND THE COMMUNITY OF HUNDREDS OF
THOUSANDS OF PHISH FANS IS AS
RABID AS EVER, MANY FOLLOWING
THE GROUP FROM CONCERT TO
CONCERT.
AND THAT, SAYS ANASTASIO, IS
FUNDAMENTAL TO THE BAND'S
IDENTITY.
>> A LOT OF THE PEOPLE THAT COME
SEE US HAVE BEEN COMING FOR 20,
30 YEARS.
AND I HAVE-- AS STRANGE AS THIS
SOUNDS-- RELATIONSHIPS WITH
PEOPLE WHO STAND, LIKE, TEN ROWS
BACK AND DANCE THAT I RECOGNIZE.
I WALK ON STAGE, SAY HI, AND
IT'S A GOOD FEELING, AND WE
START PLAYING AND I'VE NEVER
SPOKEN A WORD TO THEM.
>> Brown: BUT WHAT MANY FANS MAY
NOT REALIZE, ANASTASIO SAYS, IS
ALL THE HARD WORK THAT GOES INTO
WHAT THEY SEE ON STAGE.
FOR ONE THING, PHISH IS ADDICTED
TO PRACTICING.
>> THE WAY I SEE IT IS, THE
FREEDOM COMES WITH AN ENORMOUS
AMOUNT OF DISCIPLINE FIRST.
THERE IS LOTS AND LOTS OF HIDDEN
WORK IN PRACTICING THAT GETS YOU
TO THE POINT WHERE YOU CAN PLAY
LIKE THAT.
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT WE USEDPS
THAT WE WOULD DO JAMMING
EXERCISES.
WE DIDN'T WANT IT TO BE A BIG
MUSH OF, YOU KNOW, NAVEL-GAZING,
SELF-INDULGENT SOLOS.
>> Brown: YOU WANTED IT
ORGANIZED?
>> WE WANTED ORGANIZED JAMMING,
YES.
SO WE WOULD DO VERY ELABORATE
LISTENING EXERCISES WHERE WE
WOULD GO AROUND IN A CIRCLE, AND
EACH MUSICIAN WOULD START A
PHRASE, AND THEN THE OTHER THREE
WOULD HAVE TO JOIN IN HARMONY OR
RHYTHMICALLY.
WE USED TO DO RUSHING AND
DRAGGING TEMPO EXERCISES IN A
CIRCLE.
IT WOULD BE EACH PERSON'S TURN
TO DRAG, AND IF THEY DRAGGED, WE
WOULD HAVE TO GO WITH THEM
FEARLESSLY.
AND IF THEY RUSHED, WE'D GO WITH
THEM FEARLESSLY.
SO A LOT OF IT HAD TO DO WITH
BEING IN A GROUP OF PEOPLE AND
COEXISTING AND BEING A
COMMUNITY.
>> Brown: THAT WORD,
"COMMUNITY," IS CLEARLY
IMPORTANT TO ANASTASIO AND HIS
BANDMATES.
AND THE SECURITY OF THE BAND HAS
ALLOWED HIM TO PURSUE OTHER
INTERESTS.
IN ADDITION TO HIS APPEARANCES
WITH MANY LEADING ORCHESTRAS
AROUND THE COUNTRY, HE TOURS
WITH HIS OWN BAND, AND RECENTLY
WROTE THE MUSIC FOR A BROADWAY
PRODUCTION.
>> I ALWAYS LIKE TO KEEP IN THE
CHILD MIND-- I MEAN, "CHILD-
LIKE," BUT NOT "CHILDISH,"
MEANING A BEGINNER'S MIND.
I LIKE LEARNING.
I LIKE BEING THE BEGINNER.
>> Brown: YOU DO?
>> YES.
AND I LIKE TO CHALLENGE MYSELF.
I LIKE GETTING UP IN THE MORNING
AND LEARNING SOMETHING NEW.
THE OTHER THING IS THAT YOU
LEARN STUFF THAT YOU THEN TAKE
BACK TO PHISH.
>> Brown: OH, REALLY?
IT WORKS THAT WAY?
>> DEFINITELY.
YOU MIGHT BE IN A BIG ARENA, AND
THERE IS SOME KIND OF MUSIC
GOING ON OR SOME KIND OF GUITAR
SOLO OR SOMETHING, AND I THINK,
WOW, I WISH I COULD GET TO THE
LEVEL THAT I HEARD WITH, YOU
KNOW, THE PITTSBURGH SYMPHONY
THAT NIGHT, WHEN THE BRASS
SECTION WAS PLAYING.
THAT KIND OF THING, YOU KNOW, IT
OPENS YOUR MIND.
>> Brown: PERFORMING WITH THE
ORCHESTRA, ANSASTASIO SAYS, IS A
WAY TO REIMAGINE PIECES HE WROTE
FOR PHISH, BUT TO DO SO IN A WAY
THAT'S CHALLENGING AND
FULFILLING FOR THE MUSICIANS AS
WELL.
>> THE IDEA IS THAT THERE IS
NOTHING AS RHYTHMICALLY TIGHT ON
GOD'S GREEN EARTH AS AN
ORCHESTRA.
THE STRINGS USUALLY ACT IN A
PERCUSSIVE WAY, SO WE DIDN'T
WANT TO PUT A DRUM SET UP THERE.
THERE IS NOTHING AS HARMONICALLY
ELEGANT AND THERE IS NOTHING AS
TEXTURALLY ELEGANT AS AN
ORCHESTRA.
AND WE WANTED TO TAKE ADVANTAGE
OF ALL THOSE ELEMENTS.
>> Brown: IN THE MEANTIME, PHISH
GOES ON, HAVING SURVIVED DECADES
INCREDIBLE CHANGE IN THE MUSIC
BUSINESS.
>> ONE OF THE PROBLEMS FOR A
YOUNG BAND TODAY IS THAT YOU
HAVE TO GET OUT ON THE STAGE AND
PLAY AND MAKE MISTAKES IN ORDER
TO IMPROVE.
BUT I WILL SAY ONE THING HERE--
IT MAY SOUND INSENSITIVE OR
WHATEVER-- THERE IS NO FREE
RIDE, YOU KNOW.
>> Brown: MEANING?
>> SOMETIMES I THINK PEOPLE
THINK THEY ARE GOING TO GET INTO
MUSIC BECAUSE IT'S A WAY TO NOT
WORK, WHICH IS COMPLETELY THE
OPPOSITE OF THE WAY I'VE ALWAYS
LOOKED AT IT.
IF YOU LOVE IT, YOU ARE GOING TO
GET UP AT 7:00 A.M. EVERY DAY
AND PLAY ALL DAY LONG AND WORK
AND FIND GIGS.
>> Brown: THIS IS A JOB, IT'S
SOMETHING YOU WORK AT.
>> YOU'VE GOT TO LOVE IT.
YOU'VE GOT TO PUT IN YOUR 10,000
HOURS, AND THEN YOU'VE GOT TO
PUT IN ANOTHER 10,000 HOURS.
BUT YOU KNOW, IF YOU LOVE IT--
WHICH I DO-- IT'S EASY.
>> Brown: THE BAND IS ONCE AGAIN
ON THE ROAD THIS SUMMER, TOURING
THE COUNTRY.
AND PHISH FANS EVERYWHERE WILL
BE GLAD TO HEAR THAT A NEW ALBUM
IS IN THE WORKS.
>> Woodruff: WE'VE JUST POSTED
JEFF'S ENTIRE INTERVIEW WITH
TREY ANASTASIO ONLINE, PLUS WE
BOUT THE MUSIC.S TO TELL US WHAT
MORE THAN A THOUSAND SHARED
MEMORIES AND PHOTOS.
FIND A SAMPLING OF THOSE IMAGES
ON OUR WEB SITE.
>> Ifill: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
EGYPTIAN PRESIDENT MOHAMED MORSI
SAID HE WON'T STEP DOWN, EVEN AS
HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS OF
PROTESTERS FILLED THE STREETS
CALLING FOR HIM TO LEAVE.
>> TONIGHT CLASHES AND GUN FIRE
COULD BE HEARD NEAR CAIRO
UNIVERSITY.
AND THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION
ANNOUNCED IT IS IS DELAYING THE
EMPLOYER MANDATE PORTION OF THE
HEALTH CARE LAW FOR ONE YEAR.
UNTIL 2015.
>> Woodruff: ONLINE
>> Woodruff: ONLINE, VENUS
WILLIAMS' LEGACY AT WIMBLEDON
EXTENDS FAR DEEPER THAN HER FIVE
TITLES.
HARI SREENIVASSAN TELLS US MORE.
>> Sreenivasan: AT THE HEIGHT OF
HER CAREER, THE TENNIS STAR
FOUGHT FOR EQUAL PRIZE MONEY FOR
WOMEN AT THE MOST REVERED OF THE
GRAND SLAM TOURNAMENTS.
GWEN SPOKE WITH THE DIRECTOR OF
THE ESPN DOCUMENTARY "VENUS
VERSUS" TO GET PERSPECTIVE ON
THE CHAMP'S ROLE IN MAKING
HISTORY AT WIMBLEDON.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, newshour.pbs.org.
JUDY?
>> Woodruff: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON WEDNESDAY, WE'LL RECAP THE
TESTIMONY IN THE MURDER TRIAL OF
MOB BOSS, WHITEY BULGER.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE, AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
THANK YOU, AND GOOD NIGHT.